README.md, before:

# ICESat-2 Bathymetry

Interested in using ICESat-2 bathymetry data or exploring current research? This repository contains information about current and past research collected by members of the ICESat-2 bathymetry working group. 

<p align="center">
  <img src="images/bannerhorizontal2k.jpg" alt="drawing" width="800"/>
</p>


## What can ICESat-2 do?
The [ICESat-2](https://icesat-2.gsfc.nasa.gov) mission is a satellite laser altimeter launched in 2018. Its photon counting lidar makes precise elevation measurements globally, including at high-latitudes. In addition to significant contributions to glaciology and forest mapping, ICESat-2 has proven capable of measuring the depth of the seafloor with sub-meter accuracy, and as deep as 40m in good conditions.

## What's the best way to access ICESat-2 data?
The Science Team maintains a list of general ICESat-2 tools available [here](https://nsidc.org/data/user-resources/help-center/icesat-2-tools-and-services).

The working group is currently in the process of creating a bathymetric data product. Until then, users should download the geolocated photon data product ATL03 which contains all photon data. We recommend starting with [NSIDC](https://nsidc.org/data/atl03/versions/5) or [SlideRule](http://icesat2sliderule.org).

For bathymetry focused data downloading tutorials, check out one of the demo notebooks [here](https://github.com/jonm3D/OpenOceans/blob/pkg/is2data/demos/Demo_SlideRule_Interactive_Query.ipynb) or [here](https://github.com/nmt28/C-SHELPh/tree/main/4.Tutorial).

## How do I correct depth data for refraction?

Refraction-corrected depths are not currently calculated for existing data, although this will likely be included on a future bathymetric product. The approach outlined in [Parrish, Magruder et al. 2019](https://www.mdpi.com/494326) has been frequently used and validated in research, although [new approaches](https://opg.optica.org/oe/fulltext.cfm?uri=oe-29-2-2411&id=446584) have been explored in the literature as well.

_Code implementations of Parrish 2019 are available in [Python](https://github.com/ICESat2-Bathymetry/Information/blob/main/code/photon_refraction.py) and [MATLAB](https://github.com/ICESat2-Bathymetry/Information/blob/main/code/refraction_correction_atlas.m)._

<p align="center">
  <img src="images/remotesensing-11-01634-ag.png" alt="drawing" width="400"/>
</p>

The angle of refraction, phi, in the above figure is calculated from Snell's law and requires having a value for n_2, which can be computed as described in the <a href="http://research.engr.oregonstate.edu/parrish/index-refraction-seawater-and-freshwater-function-wavelength-and-temperature#overlay-context=research">discussion of the refractive index of seawater and freshwater. </a>


A water surface model (WSM) is also needed, and obtaining a WSM can be one of the most challenging aspects of refraction correction.

## How do I extract the water surface and seafloor returns?
Photon data can be labeled by hand using the [OpenOceans Manual Classification Tool](https://github.com/jonm3D/OpenOceans) or [PhotonLabeler](https://github.com/Oht0nger/PhoLabeler) tools.

Automated methods of labeling large amounts of data are an open area of research. Which method is best may depend on your use case and desired accuracy.

_EXTRACTION CODE 1 BY WORKING GROUP MEMBER_
- Description here
- Link to publication

_EXTRACTION CODE 2 BY WORKING GROUP MEMBER_
- Description here
- Link to publication

_Extaction approaches without code or by non working group members._

## Featured Member Research
### Recent Datasets by Members
[Bahamas Median DEM](https://ieee-dataport.org/documents/purely-spaceborne-open-source-approach-regional-bathymetry-mapping-bahamas-median-dem), from A PURELY SPACEBORNE OPEN SOURCE APPROACH FOR REGIONAL BATHYMETRY MAPPING (2022).
- Description here from Nathan.

[Kd532 Estimation from ICESat-2 Photon Data](https://github.com/fpcorcoran/ATLAS_Kd532)
- Description here from Forrest

[Already Labeled Data]() (missing link) 
- This ICESat-2 photon data has been manually labeled by working group members.

[Good Bathymetry Example Tracks]() (missing link)

### Other Useful Datasets
- [NOAA Digital Coast](https://coast.noaa.gov/dataviewer/#/) - Repository for NOAA survey data. In particular, elevation data and topobathymetric lidar surveys available here have been useful for validation of ICESat-2 depth data.
- [NOAA Bathymetric Data Viewer](https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/maps/bathymetry/) - Great repository for ship-based sounding data.
- [General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO)](https://download.gebco.net) - Global ocean bathymetric data available to download as a gridded product.

## Publications
The working group also maintains a shared Zotero library of ICESat-2 bathymetry related publications. [You can access it here](https://www.zotero.org/groups/4376978/icesat2_bathy).

## Membership
We could also list members and ways to contact the working group if so desired.

Member 1
member1@gmail.com
Affiliation 1

Commit message:

Updating member list and contact info

README.md, after:

# ICESat-2 Bathymetry

Interested in using ICESat-2 bathymetry data or exploring current research? This repository contains information about current and past research collected by members of the ICESat-2 bathymetry working group. 

<p align="center">
  <img src="images/bannerhorizontal2k.jpg" alt="drawing" width="800"/>
</p>


## What can ICESat-2 do?
The [ICESat-2](https://icesat-2.gsfc.nasa.gov) mission is a satellite laser altimeter launched in 2018. Its photon counting lidar makes precise elevation measurements globally, including at high-latitudes. In addition to significant contributions to glaciology and forest mapping, ICESat-2 has proven capable of measuring the depth of the seafloor with sub-meter accuracy, and as deep as 40m in good conditions.

## What's the best way to access ICESat-2 data?
The Science Team maintains a list of general ICESat-2 tools available [here](https://nsidc.org/data/user-resources/help-center/icesat-2-tools-and-services).

The working group is currently in the process of creating a bathymetric data product. Until then, users should download the geolocated photon data product ATL03 which contains all photon data. We recommend starting with [NSIDC](https://nsidc.org/data/atl03/versions/5) or [SlideRule](http://icesat2sliderule.org).

For bathymetry focused data downloading tutorials, check out one of the demo notebooks [here](https://github.com/jonm3D/OpenOceans/blob/pkg/is2data/demos/Demo_SlideRule_Interactive_Query.ipynb) or [here](https://github.com/nmt28/C-SHELPh/tree/main/4.Tutorial).

## How do I correct depth data for refraction?

Refraction-corrected depths are not currently calculated for existing data, although this will likely be included on a future bathymetric product. The approach outlined in [Parrish, Magruder et al. 2019](https://www.mdpi.com/494326) has been frequently used and validated in research, although [new approaches](https://opg.optica.org/oe/fulltext.cfm?uri=oe-29-2-2411&id=446584) have been explored in the literature as well.

_Code implementations of Parrish 2019 are available in [Python](https://github.com/ICESat2-Bathymetry/Information/blob/main/code/photon_refraction.py) and [MATLAB](https://github.com/ICESat2-Bathymetry/Information/blob/main/code/refraction_correction_atlas.m)._

<p align="center">
  <img src="images/remotesensing-11-01634-ag.png" alt="drawing" width="400"/>
</p>

The angle of refraction, $\phi$, in the above figure is calculated from Snell's law and requires having a value for n_2, which can be computed as described in the [discussion of the refractive index of seawater and freshwater](http://research.engr.oregonstate.edu/parrish/index-refraction-seawater-and-freshwater-function-wavelength-and-temperature#overlay-context=research).

A water surface model (WSM) is also needed, and obtaining a WSM can be one of the more challenging aspects of refraction correction. 

## How do I extract the water surface and seafloor returns?
Photon data can be labeled by hand using the [OpenOceans Manual Classification Tool](https://github.com/jonm3D/OpenOceans) or [PhotonLabeler](https://github.com/Oht0nger/PhoLabeler) tools.

Automated methods of labeling large amounts of data are an open area of research. Which method is best may depend on your use case and desired accuracy.

_EXTRACTION CODE 1 BY WORKING GROUP MEMBER_
- Description here
- Link to publication

_EXTRACTION CODE 2 BY WORKING GROUP MEMBER_
- Description here
- Link to publication

_Extaction approaches without code or by non working group members._

## Featured Member Research
### Recent Datasets by Members
[Bahamas Median DEM](https://ieee-dataport.org/documents/purely-spaceborne-open-source-approach-regional-bathymetry-mapping-bahamas-median-dem), from A PURELY SPACEBORNE OPEN SOURCE APPROACH FOR REGIONAL BATHYMETRY MAPPING (2022).
- Description here from Nathan.

[Kd532 Estimation from ICESat-2 Photon Data](https://github.com/fpcorcoran/ATLAS_Kd532)
- Description here from Forrest

[Already Labeled Data]() (missing link) 
- This ICESat-2 photon data has been manually labeled by working group members.

[Good Bathymetry Example Tracks]() (missing link)

### Other Useful Datasets
- [NOAA Digital Coast](https://coast.noaa.gov/dataviewer/#/) - Repository for NOAA survey data. In particular, elevation data and topobathymetric lidar surveys available here have been useful for validation of ICESat-2 depth data.
- [NOAA Bathymetric Data Viewer](https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/maps/bathymetry/) - Great repository for ship-based sounding data.
- [General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO)](https://download.gebco.net) - Global ocean bathymetric data available to download as a gridded product.

## Publications
The working group also maintains a shared Zotero library of ICESat-2 bathymetry related publications. [You can access it here](https://www.zotero.org/groups/4376978/icesat2_bathy).

## Contributing Working Group Members
Dr. Chris Parrish
Associate Professor, Oregon State University
christopher.parrish@oregonstate.edu

Dr. Nathan Thomas
Assistant Research Scientist, NASA Goddard
nathan.m.thomas@nasa.gov

Dr. Xiomei Lu
Research Scientist, SSAI/NASA Langley Research Center
xiaomei.lu@nasa.gov

Jonathan Markel
PhD Student, The University of Texas at Austin
jonathanmarkel@gmail.com
